Okay.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to the first lecture of week nine.
Before we start, this is the Attendance Book club.
NOTE CONF
So I will be putting on the one for the
problems of today shortly.
NOTE CONF
But before we start that, there is a short announcement,
which is that the School of Mathematics is running some
NOTE CONF
exam preparation and effective revision, or the other way around.
I don't remember workshops which are running from the 20th
NOTE CONF
of November.
So approximately a week from now up until the 29th,
NOTE CONF
you can register there is a link which, uh, which
Andreas is going to share on the learn page.
NOTE CONF
So my job here at the moment is just telling
you that, um, just keep an eye out on learn
NOTE CONF
for the announcement if you're interested.
It can be useful if you're struggling with the organisational
NOTE CONF
aspect of, uh, preparing for your exams.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Having said that, let's, uh, have a quick look at
the outline for today.
NOTE CONF
Um, in the meantime, I'm going to switch the book
club behind the scenes.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
So now the book club is no longer the attendance.
NOTE CONF
This one should be.
If it comes out, yes, this one should be the
NOTE CONF
one for the problems of today.
So if you could scan it in the meantime, that'd
NOTE CONF
be great.
Okay, in the meantime, this week, as you've seen from
NOTE CONF
the from the reading, we have two slightly different things
to juggle.
NOTE CONF
The first one is the concept of similarity for matrices,
which is an interesting concept in itself.
NOTE CONF
Um, we will talk a little bit more about why
similarity is interested as an equivalence relation, and how uh,
NOTE CONF
theoretical algebra, um, thing in terms of, uh, equivalence relations.
But it's also interesting because similar matrices share quite a
NOTE CONF
long list of property among themselves.
And we can then exploit similarity to say something interesting
NOTE CONF
about about those matrices.
And instead tomorrow we will tackle the other main topic
NOTE CONF
of the reading of this of this week, which has
more to do about, uh, sort of, uh, extension of
NOTE CONF
the similarity procedures that we have seen.
We're now familiar with how to calculate eigenvectors and eigenspaces,
NOTE CONF
uh, for matrices of, uh, any, any size, any square
size through the characteristic polynomial.
NOTE CONF
And we will generalise the concept of eigenvectors to eigenspaces.
and we will give some equivalence relation between, um, between
NOTE CONF
those two.
Uh, definitions that we've seen one in this week and
NOTE CONF
one a couple weeks ago.
And in particular the concept of multiplicity will come out
NOTE CONF
and we will relate it with what you already already
know.
NOTE CONF
So this is the, uh, sort of a bird's eye
view of the content of the week.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, let's have a look.
This is the same book club.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
The code is still the same.
And today, instead of jumping right into an exercise, I
NOTE CONF
thought that, uh, given that the central concept will be
similarity, let's give it a definition first.
NOTE CONF
I'm sure you remember it, but, uh, two matrices are
similar, and we write a tilde B if it is
NOTE CONF
an invertible matrix P such that.
The second matrix in the in the similarity b can
NOTE CONF
be written as p minus one, a p, and.
I hope it was clear from the reading and from
NOTE CONF
the video that I've made in the in the reading
section.
NOTE CONF
Um, this this definition has a little bit of flexibility
built in it because the similarity is, um, symmetric.
NOTE CONF
So if A similar to b, b is similar to
a.
NOTE CONF
And so we could actually rewrite that that expression as
a equal p minus 1ABP that is an equivalent version
NOTE CONF
of that.
And because p is invertible p minus one is invertible
NOTE CONF
as well.
And so we can also rewrite that as b equals
NOTE CONF
p a p minus one.
They're all equivalent version.
NOTE CONF
But the original one that we've seen from the from
the book Was was this one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, uh, just a quick example of how we calculate
NOTE CONF
the similar matrix.
Well, I put this example just to show you that,
NOTE CONF
uh, um, similar matrices do not share structure between themselves.
So by choosing this, uh, uh, this matrix A and
NOTE CONF
this and this invertible matrix P, we can move A
to another matrix B, which is this one here, and
NOTE CONF
B is lower triangular and A was not.
So um, similarity preserves a lot of characteristic of the
NOTE CONF
matrix.
Uh, but uh, not the structure in general.
NOTE CONF
So it is uh, um, it is interesting.
It's not that if we move from one matrix to
NOTE CONF
a similar one, we are not really doing anything.
And if you've watched the video, I make the point
NOTE CONF
that similarity moves between different matrix representation of the same
linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
And what I mean by that is that, uh, linear
transformations are the fundamental concept of linear algebra, and matrices
NOTE CONF
express linear transformations in terms of a specific base.
And so what we're doing when we pass from one
NOTE CONF
matrix to the other with the similarity, we are rephrasing
the same linear transformation acting on our n into um
NOTE CONF
from one, from the expression in one base to the
expression to the other base, and the matrix that allows
NOTE CONF
us to move from the basis of the first, uh,
sorry, from the vectors of the first space to the
NOTE CONF
vector of the second base we've seen is p minus
one.
NOTE CONF
And we know that because p minus one is the
matrix that moves the eigenvectors of the matrices.
NOTE CONF
We'll see more about that a little bit later.
But this was the two minute summary of what we're
NOTE CONF
trying to do and why we're trying, uh and why
matrix similarity is interesting at its core.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, having done the introduction, we have five exercises today.
NOTE CONF
One is, uh, just like last, last week with the
tiered exercises.
NOTE CONF
I will ask you to, um, pick and choose the
level that you feel comfortable dealing with.
NOTE CONF
Uh, one is a new addition, which is a brainstorming
exercises.
NOTE CONF
We will reuse a reconstruction of the proof.
But the first one that we start with is something
NOTE CONF
that, uh, we've always used.
It's a good old, uh, number of statements that, um,
NOTE CONF
you need to, um.
You need to analyse and tell me if they're true
NOTE CONF
or not.
And they're all based on the similarity definition.
NOTE CONF
And so let's try to build an understanding on how,
um, matrix similarity and more generally, um, equivalence relation work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's five of them.
NOTE CONF
They should be fairly, fairly straightforward.
Um, I'll just come around very quickly to check that
NOTE CONF
everything is working out for you.
And then we can we can go through them together.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I can see the book club is working and
everything is working fine from the IT side of things.
NOTE CONF
As usual, try and discuss share ideas, especially if you
disagree with your neighbours.
NOTE CONF
That's, uh, that's the best case scenario, because then, uh,
at least 50% of you will learn something new.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I see I have almost 60 answers already, so
I would invite those of you who are still submitting
NOTE CONF
them, uh, to put in your answer, lock them in
and let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
Great response rate for the first one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I made it too simple, Probably.
And then you think, broadly speaking, that three and 5th
NOTE CONF
May be, uh, may be correct.
And two and four are definitely not, not, not the
NOTE CONF
right one.
And I didn't specify this, but I hope it was
NOTE CONF
clear by notation.
When I have the similarity crossed out, just as equal
NOTE CONF
becomes not equal to the tilde crossed would mean uh
b in the second case a not similar to be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
The first statement you've identified, 97% got this right.
It's true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we have shown that the proof for transitivity, and
we know that transitivity is, uh, property of, um, equivalence
NOTE CONF
relations.
Uh, I've just copy pasted the proof from my video
NOTE CONF
here.
Um, there is just one, uh, little bit that we
NOTE CONF
need to, that we need to add in that transitivity
is done for normally two pairs of matrices.
NOTE CONF
So the transitivity is normally expressed as a similar to
b be similar to see A similar to c.
NOTE CONF
Here we're skipping one step more.
We're doing a similar to b b similar to c
NOTE CONF
c similar to d a similar to d, but you
can just repeat the same proof twice to extend to
NOTE CONF
as many to as many matrices you to like.
Okay, so nothing.
NOTE CONF
Nothing particularly nothing particularly deep here.
It's just the same proof all over again.
NOTE CONF
And you get to the to the result.
A little bit more interesting was probably this one.
NOTE CONF
If A is the not similar to B, and B
is not similar to C, then A is not similar
NOTE CONF
to C and only between a quarter and a third
of you think this is true?
NOTE CONF
Um, can someone from the majority, from the people that
answered that this is false?
NOTE CONF
Give me a quick reason why they think so.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Well, this is false because it is true that the
contrapositive would be true.
NOTE CONF
And we are we would be saying if A is
similar to C, then it k is similar to any
NOTE CONF
matrix B.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So you're right.
NOTE CONF
That is one way of seeing it.
If we know that this is equivalent to the contrapositive
NOTE CONF
statement, which would be if A is similar to C
because that's the negation of what's on the right hand
NOTE CONF
side, then the negation of what's on the left hand
side is true.
NOTE CONF
And so we would be saying if A similar to
C, then A must also be similar to B, which
NOTE CONF
is a random matrix that doesn't appear in the hypothesis.
And so that that's a that's a nice giveaway that
NOTE CONF
this must in fact be be false.
And it is.
NOTE CONF
I was going along slightly different lines here, and the
point that I was trying to make is that, uh,
NOTE CONF
if transitivity works for a property, it doesn't necessarily mean
that it works for the opposite property.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have proven that, uh, that, um, um, that
NOTE CONF
being similar to is a transitive property.
That doesn't imply that not being similar, uh, also has
NOTE CONF
that property.
And that is true in general.
NOTE CONF
It goes way beyond, um, matrix similarity.
It's true for any possible, um, an equivalence relation that
NOTE CONF
you will find in mathematics.
And uh, you can also construct a very simple counterexample
NOTE CONF
in which you pick a equal to C, Uh, and
b a matrix that's not similar to A and therefore
NOTE CONF
not, not similar to C because they're the same matrix.
And then if two matrices are similar then obviously sorry.
NOTE CONF
If two matrices are the same then they're obviously similar
because you can pick the matrix P that moves from
NOTE CONF
the that moves you from one to the other state
entity matrix okay.
NOTE CONF
If A is invertible, then a b similar to be
a for all b.
NOTE CONF
Here we have a split down the middle.
Almost only 58%.
NOTE CONF
Um thinks that this is true.
Uh, so maybe I'll give you one more minute to
NOTE CONF
discuss.
If you have anyone in your neighbourhood that is, um,
NOTE CONF
that is not convinced one way or the other, you
can try and change their mind very quickly, given that
NOTE CONF
we're roughly down the middle.
Um, and then we'll do it.
NOTE CONF
We'll do it together.
Okay, just with the raising of hands now, just to
NOTE CONF
see how percentages have shifted.
Uh, those who think that number three is true.
NOTE CONF
Now, if number three is true.
Okay, I see two hands, so we don't have big
NOTE CONF
statistics to see if that 50% has moved.
Who thinks it's false?
NOTE CONF
I see four hands.
Uh, I don't think we can draw any statistically relevant
NOTE CONF
conclusion with that.
Uh, so let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's have a look at that.
It's true.
NOTE CONF
Um, it seems that it has shifted more towards the
false side, but it's actually true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this one was, uh, I think I took this
one from one of the exercises at the end of
NOTE CONF
the chapter.
Uh, why is it true?
NOTE CONF
Well, um, then we want to write this thing here,
right?
NOTE CONF
BA equals p minus one ab for, uh, times, P
for some appropriate p Invertible.
NOTE CONF
But, uh, here the thing is that we can pick
p equal to A because A is invertible, and invertibility
NOTE CONF
is everything that is needed for a P to be
picked.
NOTE CONF
And if we do that, that equation here, which is
what we need to prove again, look at how we've
NOTE CONF
how we're formulating this.
We need to prove that this is correct.
NOTE CONF
But we are free to choose P however we like.
If we choose p equal to A, then well the
NOTE CONF
left hand side stays the same, but the right hand
side becomes a minus one a which go away and
NOTE CONF
then BP becomes ba.
So ba ba which is always true.
NOTE CONF
And so for that specific choices of p because this
one is true.
NOTE CONF
This one also needs needs to be true.
And thus uh, um, and thus satisfy the condition of
NOTE CONF
similarity between these two matrices.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And note that, uh, there can be any shenanigan going
on with the dimensions because A is invertible, so it's
NOTE CONF
square.
And uh, therefore, um, that, uh, thing makes sense from
NOTE CONF
a dimensional point of view as well.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This one is interesting.
At least I found it interesting.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if A similar to B and C is similar
to D, then we can sum or subtract the matrices.
NOTE CONF
And most of you want to know, and I'd be
curious to hear from someone who says no.
NOTE CONF
Well, your thought process is.
You are correct.
NOTE CONF
The answer to this is false.
This is not true in general, but it's one of
NOTE CONF
those that, uh, they're quite tricky to prove.
In fact, I tried to come up with a explicit
NOTE CONF
counterexample and I didn't find one very easily.
So because I was expecting this to be more mixed.
NOTE CONF
But you all seem confident that it's false.
So how?
NOTE CONF
I'm genuinely curious how how you got that.
And very quickly.
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, um, the way I, I went about doing that
was, um, was to write explicitly to, to the two
NOTE CONF
conditions and note that, uh, um, in general, the matrix
that allows us to pass from A to B under
NOTE CONF
similarity and from C to D and the similarity, they're
not the same matrix.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We cannot suppose in these two writings here that p
NOTE CONF
is equal to q to to q.
So we can't collect.
NOTE CONF
We can collect p and q there.
The problem with this proof is it looks like it's
NOTE CONF
a sound proof, but it's incomplete because there could be
another matrix that is not neither p nor q.
NOTE CONF
Another matrix U such that a plus c is equal
to u b plus or minus d u minus one,
NOTE CONF
and proving that that that matrix does not exist is
actually quite hard.
NOTE CONF
So I decided not to include that.
But your intuition is correct in the sense that, uh,
NOTE CONF
um, you can't uh, you can straight up collect that.
And for that reason in general, there is some requirement
NOTE CONF
between the the P and the Q that allow you
to pass between the two pairs of matrices.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for this to work.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And finally, there is no matrix similar to the zero
matrix.
NOTE CONF
You know that a0.
Uh, I pick it to be the matrix in which
NOTE CONF
will all entries are zero, and, uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, you're about in the middle, except, uh, slim
majority of you thinks it's true.
NOTE CONF
And this is actually false.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
I wrote true, but, uh.
But but it's false.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, the zero matrix is similar only to itself.
And you can see that because if you try to
NOTE CONF
write out the definition, if you put a zero matrix
in between these two matrices here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, well, the zero matrix multiply everything to zero.
So if you're trying to do a matrix multiplication that
NOTE CONF
involves the matrix, all you're going to get is the
zero matrix itself.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this one, uh uh, perhaps I should have
phrased it as there is no other matrix similar to
NOTE CONF
the zero matrix, in the sense that the zero matrix
is only similar, um, to itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have any questions about any of these statements
NOTE CONF
or any of the properties that we've seen about matrix
similarity, anything at all?
NOTE CONF
Nope.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In that case, let's move on to, uh, question number
two, which is the oh, this is showing the correct
NOTE CONF
order.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Um, which was the proof.
Um, this was the proof of, uh, I don't remember
NOTE CONF
the number of the theorem, but it's one of the
theorems in the book.
NOTE CONF
And the reason why I have you reordering the proof
is not for the proof itself, which is quite, uh,
NOTE CONF
quite standard.
I just want to make a few comments along the
NOTE CONF
way when we when we go over the proof together,
why some of the steps need to be in this
NOTE CONF
order and not another order.
And also this proof has, uh, the pleasant property that,
NOTE CONF
unlike the ones from the last two times, there's only
one sort of correct solution into the to the reordering
NOTE CONF
assignment.
So I'll give you a couple of minutes to work
NOTE CONF
through it.
Um, ideally, I would like you to focus on the
NOTE CONF
relation between the the subsequent steps.
Uh, I don't particularly mind if you get a few
NOTE CONF
wrong, but really trying to focus your attention on why
does this step necessarily follow this one?
NOTE CONF
Why does this step.
Why can't this step go before this one?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Try to reconstruct so that the logical flow of things.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
It's usual.
NOTE CONF
Like, uh, this gas compare.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Very welcome.
So if you want to jot it down for your
NOTE CONF
reference.
This is a part of the proof of theorem 5.5.1.
NOTE CONF
So if you if you need to have a look
at it later, you can find it quickly.
NOTE CONF
Slowly trying to make her way through the proof.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Well, this one isn't at this point.
One isn't really saying anything, is it?
NOTE CONF
We're just, uh, clearly stating what we need to prove.
What's our thesis?
NOTE CONF
Um, we we are assuming the two matrices are similar,
and we want to show that they have the same
NOTE CONF
eigenvalues.
And I just wrote out, uh, wrote out the set
NOTE CONF
of the two, uh, of the eigenvalues of the two
matrices.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What the first.
Let's have a look at the first, uh, um, real
NOTE CONF
step of the proof, which is step two, which, uh.
It's a sleight of hand.
NOTE CONF
Instead of proving something.
We're proving something else that implies what we want to
NOTE CONF
prove.
Once again, a classic trick in mathematical proof.
NOTE CONF
Because the eigenvalues, the eigenvalues are the roots of the
characteristic polynomial.
NOTE CONF
If we show that the matrices have the same characteristic
polynomial, uh, two polynomials that are the same will have
NOTE CONF
the same roots, of course, and so the two matrices
will have the same eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
So this was the first point that I wanted to,
uh, to hammer home.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is uh, prove something else instead.
That then automatically proves what you want.
NOTE CONF
In fact, in this proof, we won't even talk about,
uh, eigenvalues anymore.
NOTE CONF
We just limit the discussion to about eigenvalues two, noting
that two implies one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then we forget completely about eigenvalues, which I thought
NOTE CONF
was really interesting because in principle you think that this
proof is just messing around with eigenvalues until you get
NOTE CONF
something useful out of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Step number three doesn't really add much to that.
It's just the definition of what the characteristic polynomial polynomial
NOTE CONF
is.
And now we feed into this into this definition the
NOTE CONF
hypothesis of the of the of the theorem.
Now we know that be similar to a and so
NOTE CONF
this a here can be written as uh the similarity
definition as a function of b.
NOTE CONF
This step I want to break down into two.
But then I left it in just because the identity
NOTE CONF
matrix is so is so simple.
What I've done here is I multiplied only the last
NOTE CONF
term here to the right by p minus one p,
which is the identity.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not really changing that term anymore because here
what I'm saying is x minus x identity is equal
NOTE CONF
to minus x identity times the identity.
Again because the identity is essentially just like multiplying by
NOTE CONF
one.
And then I say because the identity I can write
NOTE CONF
that second identity as p minus one p by the
definition of the inverse.
NOTE CONF
And now the identity matrix commutes with every other matrix.
So what was originally x I p minus one p
NOTE CONF
becomes x p minus 1IP.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, might have uh, might have been better if I
had split that step up.
NOTE CONF
But again, we're comfortable with working with the identity by
now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then we can use associativity Collect the terms that are
NOTE CONF
before and after the interesting bit, which will be b
minus x I x I.
NOTE CONF
We see that both terms are multiplied by p minus
one on the left and p on the right, so
NOTE CONF
we can collect.
And then we use the the property of the determinant
NOTE CONF
that the determinant of the product of matrices is just
the product of determinants.
NOTE CONF
And now we have directly related the expression of the
CA with the expression of CB through their definition.
NOTE CONF
So everything that we left to do is to show
that any remaining terms that we have inputted during the
NOTE CONF
way they simplify to one, and indeed they do, because
the determinant of the inverse of a certain matrix is
NOTE CONF
one over the determinant.
So they so they simplify.
NOTE CONF
So k is equal to the determinant of only this
thing here.
NOTE CONF
But that is the expression of CB.
And so we conclude by 0.2.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So two things to bring home.
NOTE CONF
The first one I already said.
The second one is about recreating the structure that we're
NOTE CONF
interested in.
In a way we're using this two way relations from
NOTE CONF
CA to the determinant of a minus x I and
from CB to the to, to this determinant here.
NOTE CONF
And so the relation between CA and CB is written
through uh through this quantity here that we can then
NOTE CONF
manipulate, uh, using the properties of the determinant which do
not otherwise apply to um, to polynomials.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um, the polynomials of this matrix, uh, we can't really
NOTE CONF
say, uh, we can't really say if it's the same
as the polynomial of uh, CB directly.
NOTE CONF
So again, a two standard way of doing the proofs.
Um, which are really the same thing.
NOTE CONF
If it's something is difficult to prove, you can always
change to something else which is better suited for your
NOTE CONF
intentions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And in the very same spirit of this, I have
prepared a new question, which is a brainstorm.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm asking you to do is to write
down, uh, various possible options that complete, uh, these, uh,
NOTE CONF
these two very common, uh, conditions in linear algebra.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So, um, as an example, we've just seen if A
similar to B.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yes.
B similar to a would be one.
NOTE CONF
But um, for for example, another one that we have
just seen would be eigenvalues of A equals eigenvalues of
NOTE CONF
B.
And I've done this for something in the in in
NOTE CONF
today in, in this week's lecture.
But also something from from from last lecture.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
From last week.
NOTE CONF
Just because this is also very important property.
And I think it's a useful exercise to think about
NOTE CONF
how different property relates.
I am going to leave the solutions on the board
NOTE CONF
because I'm going to ask you to, instead of keeping
writing down everything so that we have 100 different lines
NOTE CONF
here.
If you see something that you are going to write
NOTE CONF
anyway, you can just like the comment.
And so the top one will rise to the one
NOTE CONF
rise at the top, okay.
And also give some love to number two as well.
NOTE CONF
I can see that you're all focussed on similarity, but
give the full rank properties and love.
NOTE CONF
And again, this exercise really relies on you discussing with
someone else because you might not remember all properties, but
NOTE CONF
hopefully together with your two neighbours or three neighbours, you
will, you will be able to reconstruct most of them.
NOTE CONF
I have uh, I think I have written down five
for the first one for the similarity, and I've written
NOTE CONF
down eight for the second one.
So a property of a matrix being full rank is
NOTE CONF
connected to a lot of stuff.
Let's see if you, uh, collectively get all eight that
NOTE CONF
I've written down.
And I'm sure you will get more that I didn't
NOTE CONF
think of.
Okay, let's have a look to at which properties you
NOTE CONF
have found out.
So B is similar to a uh, second one.
NOTE CONF
I'm not sure it's a property of A.
You're just multiplying it many times.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the determinants are the same.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
That was part of the theorem 5.5.1.
Uh, the inverses of the matrix of the two matrices
NOTE CONF
are also similar.
That's an excellent one.
NOTE CONF
That's actually part of the next exercise.
So well done for spotting that.
NOTE CONF
Um, the determinants are the same.
The trees are the same, the ranks are the same.
NOTE CONF
Once again, um, uh, point of the theorem.
5.5.1 uh, can someone translate these two for me, please?
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'll look them up afterwards.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Same characteristic.
Polynomial.
NOTE CONF
Yes, absolutely.
They're transpose.
NOTE CONF
Are, uh, also similar?
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Row A and row B, uh, this one.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
I would need to think about it.
It's not immediately obvious because we're not.
NOTE CONF
If we assume that they're both full rank, then.
Well, if we assume that A's will rank, this follows
NOTE CONF
immediately, right.
Because, uh, because, um, um, then B has the same
NOTE CONF
rank.
So it's full rank and so they both spam the
NOTE CONF
same.
The same space, but without that added property, that might
NOTE CONF
not be that might not be correct.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If it's full rank.
So by, uh, just as, uh, these are the five
NOTE CONF
properties that are, um, included in theorem 5.5.1.
And these are the five ones that I've included as
NOTE CONF
well.
Uh, what about, uh, number two?
NOTE CONF
The dimension of the null space is zero.
Yes, absolutely.
NOTE CONF
And Andrea is going to come back for the revision
week only.
NOTE CONF
So week 11, you will see him, um, the dimension
of the images and yes, of course, that's the definition
NOTE CONF
of being full rank invertible.
Absolutely.
NOTE CONF
Except the existing inverse.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I like this one.
NOTE CONF
I really like this one.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Be careful.
This was in the very first workshop.
NOTE CONF
Be careful with words in mathematics.
What does this act will be has a as a
NOTE CONF
solution mean?
It could be interpreted as it has at least one
NOTE CONF
solution, or it has exactly one solution.
So careful with the with how you phrase thing.
NOTE CONF
The correct version here is.
At least or exactly.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
You can write it out by multiplying a minus one
NOTE CONF
on the left right x equal a minus one times
b, and because a minus one is uniquely defined, a
NOTE CONF
minus a minus one b is also unique.
So it has exactly one solution.
NOTE CONF
And you can actually write it out columns in independent.
And then yes I can see you've got most of
NOTE CONF
it.
Right okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are the eight ones.
So that I was able to come up with okay.
NOTE CONF
Now I was planning oh yeah okay.
Let's do it.
NOTE CONF
I was planning a short break from the exercises and
talk about the general properties of the equivalence relationships.
NOTE CONF
Because I think it's helpful to understand how they work.
From an algebraic point of view, and this is not
NOTE CONF
examined in theory.
Um, but, uh, the set of all matrices that have
NOTE CONF
dimension n at times n.
Mathematician call it the Glenn.
NOTE CONF
It's called the general linear group of size n.
So in here you have all n times n matrices
NOTE CONF
that you can come up with.
They're all points in this in this space in the
NOTE CONF
set.
Uh here we have the matrix with all zeros.
NOTE CONF
Here we have the identity matrix that we know.
Here we have I called one in the matrix that
NOTE CONF
has every entry equal to one.
Um, and here we have the diagonal matrix with 123,
NOTE CONF
four, five n uh, for example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What are we doing in this representation when we're talking
about, uh.
NOTE CONF
About equivalence relations.
Well, we are cutting up that space in a, in
NOTE CONF
a different in a number of different subset of that
bigger picture there.
NOTE CONF
And each of these slices, and they are the set
of the matrices that, that are similar to the other
NOTE CONF
one that are in the same slice.
So for example, we we can prove that the diagonal
NOTE CONF
matrix is similar to the um to the identity matrix.
So they live in the same slice.
NOTE CONF
The matrix with all ones is not, uh, is not
similar to the identity matrix because it's not invertible.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't have the same rank.
And so it lives in another slice of the space.
NOTE CONF
And there are two things.
Oh, and finally the zero matrix.
NOTE CONF
We've shown that it's similar only to itself.
So the set of all matrix n times n that
NOTE CONF
are similar to the zero matrix is the set that
contains only the zero matrix itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, why is this interesting?
NOTE CONF
Well, there's really two properties that are interesting here.
The first one is now the three characteristic that we've
NOTE CONF
seen.
Uh, reflexivity, symmetry and transitivity means that each matrix is
NOTE CONF
in one and only one of these partitions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This matrix cannot be both here and here because otherwise
these two slices must be the same one.
NOTE CONF
And this is something that you will see much better
when you see a course in theoretical algebra.
NOTE CONF
But I think it's just, uh, uh, too nice of
an example to, um, to let it slide.
NOTE CONF
And the other one is that every single matrix n
times n that you can come up with is in
NOTE CONF
one of these slices here.
And so this nicely, completely cover the set of all
NOTE CONF
the matrices that exist in this group here, which is
all the square matrices n times n.
NOTE CONF
So this is again not part of this course and
not not examined here.
NOTE CONF
But I just wanted to give you this picture because
you will see this again further down the line and
NOTE CONF
sort of start to build your understanding on how equivalence
relation work in terms of the big picture of the
NOTE CONF
space.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Next up, because uh, uh, we've been going on for
quite some time, I'm going to skip the lecture summary
NOTE CONF
and move straight to question five instead.
Question five is uh, just like last, uh, last, um,
NOTE CONF
last week, uh, you're not supposed to pick all five.
Just pick the ones you're confident with.
NOTE CONF
According to the, um, to the traffic line symbol.
Uh, this is supposed to be yellow, but some of
NOTE CONF
this is yellow.
It just looks very much red.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can pick whichever difficulty you want, and I'm
going to go through all of them in a couple
NOTE CONF
of minutes.
But you really drill down, uh, to one of 1
NOTE CONF
or 2 of them.
So let's have a look at the first one, because
NOTE CONF
we only have a few minutes left to do.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
This one says if the rank is different, then they
can be similar.
NOTE CONF
And this once again is the contrapositive, uh, trick that
I pulled on you.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we saw in the previous theorem that if two
matrices are similar, that the rank must be the same.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so if the rank is not the same, they
can't possibly be similar.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um.
NOTE CONF
Statement two was an observation to theorem 5.5.1, which was
that uh similarity preserve the eigenvalues, but not the eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
And the reasoning behind it was exactly that.
Uh, we're seeing the same linear transformation in different basis.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I've shown you this in the in the
reading video, if x is a eigenvector associated to a
NOTE CONF
with eigenvalue lambda, then the eigenvector associated to lambda and
b uh transforms with p minus one.
NOTE CONF
So p minus one x is the corresponding eigenvector.
And uh I didn't include it in this, but I
NOTE CONF
invite you to try a counterexample.
And uh, this is one of those easy counterexample to
NOTE CONF
to see.
Because if you just throw down a random matrix, chances
NOTE CONF
are that the eigenvalues, the eigenvectors will not be the
same.
NOTE CONF
You need to be extremely lucky to pick by chance
a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Uh, well, two similar matrices for which this is a
is true.
NOTE CONF
You have to pick them essentially in such a way
that, uh, x is an eigenvalue, is an eigenvector of
NOTE CONF
p one of p minus one as well.
So if that is true then obviously a p minus
NOTE CONF
one x is aligned with x because you get p
minus one x equals lambda x.
NOTE CONF
But otherwise you're safe.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh next up, if A is diagonalisable then A is
similar to its transpose.
NOTE CONF
And this one is true, although I put it down
as an orange because it requires a little bit of,
NOTE CONF
um, quite a bit more of, uh, manipulation.
And the first bit is easy.
NOTE CONF
Um, if ace is diagonalisable, then we can transform it
into a matrix D, which is orthogonal, which was the
NOTE CONF
main result of the diagonalization theorem that we've seen, uh,
a few weeks ago.
NOTE CONF
And then we can invert this relation by multiplying p
minus one on the left, p on the right.
NOTE CONF
And next we can transpose, uh, this whole thing and
we get the a transpose is PD p minus one
NOTE CONF
transpose.
But we know that taking the transpose of a product
NOTE CONF
is equal to taking the product of the transpose in
the opposite direction.
NOTE CONF
So taking the transpose of p d, p minus one
is actually the same thing as doing p minus one
NOTE CONF
transpose d transpose p transposed.
But d transpose is the same as d because it's
NOTE CONF
diagonal.
So if you switch rows and columns, the diagonal stays
NOTE CONF
the same.
And now you have these two relations and you can
NOTE CONF
take this D here and put it in here essentially.
That's what what what we're doing here.
NOTE CONF
And then you you regroup and you see that.
You also know that when you take an inverse of
NOTE CONF
a product, it's also the same as taking the product
of the inverses but in the reverse order.
NOTE CONF
So you can collect this to be p t p
p t minus one.
NOTE CONF
And so a, t and a are related by through
similarity by the matrix p p transpose.
NOTE CONF
And you know that the transpose of the invertible matrix
is invertible.
NOTE CONF
And you can know that from the fact, for example,
that, uh, uh, if A is invertible, its full rank.
NOTE CONF
So the span of the columns is uh n.
And so the span of the rows of T is
NOTE CONF
also n.
But the span of the rows of 80 is uh,
NOTE CONF
the rank itself.
So its full rank.
NOTE CONF
So 80 also works.
Um, also works that way.
NOTE CONF
And so we conclude that this is in fact true.
And it's 101.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to call it a day for the
last two ones.
NOTE CONF
We are going to do them first thing tomorrow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF